# Buchla 210e
## Control Voltage and Signal Router

This module directs the routing of eight control voltages and eight audio signals. The two sections function independently. Originally conceived of as an aid to store and retrieve patch routings, the 210e evolved into a module with additional capabilities.

In the control voltage section, each of five outputs can be connected to any one of eight inputs (the functional replacement for a patchcord). If more than one input is routed to an output, the result is the sum of the applied values.

Similarly, the signal routing section allows connection of each of five outputs to any one of eight inputs (patchcord emulation). Additionally, this section provides the possibility for matrix mixing, in which an output can respond to multiple inputs, with each connection independently scalable.

To route a control voltage, use the lower input/output select switches to choose the desired input and output (crosspoint); use the level knob to establish the degree of connection. A direct, full scale connection is indicated by both LED's being lit. A lesser connection has just one LED on. Note that multiple inputs can be connected to a single output; the output will be the sum of the scaled inputs. A push of the level knob will immediately connect the signal at full level or disconnect it (at no level).

To route an audio signal, use the upper select switches to choose a desired input and output; the amplitude knob selects the desired signal level. Lower than full scale settings are indicated with an orange LED; unity gain and larger with both LED's. A single red LED indicates the maximum amplitude, 10 db more than unity gain. Multiple inputs connected to a single output are mixed (summed). (To emulate a patchcord, select just one input per output and set its amplitude to unity gain.) A push of the knob will immediately connect the signal at full level or disconnect it.

Use the solo switch to audition the effect of a single input; other inputs will be disconnected in this mode. Additionally, the solo switch turns the entire display into an indicator of the coefficients associated with the 5 selected inputs for boththe signal and the control voltage inputs . The thresholdsfor the LED's are .2, 1.6, 3.0, 4.4, 5.8, 7.2, 8.6, and 10.0. Or thereabouts. The display is a multiple bar graph, with all LED's below the set one illuminated. Reset the solo switch to escape this display.

Patch routings and level settings may be locally stored and subsequently recalled by the model 225e or 206e preset manager.

To connect or disconnect this module from the central library function, push the remote switch. The lighted LED signifies a connection.
