# Description - model 223e Tactile Input Port

The 223 Tactile Input Port is a mutation of the 222e Kinesthetic Input Port; it drops the ring sensors in favor of a simple arpeggiation function. We'll deal first with the tactile surface and its outputs; then with the arpeggiation.

**Tactile Surface**

The tactile surface consists of 27 individual keys, each containing an LED for status indication. Responses can be programmed by the user to generate pulses, programmed control voltages, pressure and impact responses. The longer keys can respond to the location of a finger along the key, and the two hexagon keys are sensitive to 2 dimensions. Programming is accomplished with the aid of an LCD, whose states are changed with a "page" key.

The first page deals with singular pulses:

| **Puls 1:Ta 2:_d
3: u 4:Tc 5:Tg** |


Use the cursor key to select the desired pulse, the nature of the response you'd like, and the key you'd like to serve as the source. A blank in the first position of the field causes a pulse to be delivered upon touching the key; a T causes a toggled response, with alternate touches reversing its state. The second position selects the actuating key by either turning the data wheel or by simply touching the desired key.

**OUTPUTS 6 - 9**

The next page is one of four "radio" pages _(named for a "radio button" scheme for selecting stations on prehistoric car radios and nothing to do with RF)._

| **Radio:6 ky:g Loc
CV1:334 CV2:999** |

Select the desired page with the data entry knob. Cursor into the "ky" field and capitalize it with the data entry knob to display the keys assigned to the current page. Enable desired keys by simply touching them. Disable them with a second touch. To escape from this mode, cursor to the "ky" field and with the data entry knob, decapitalize it.

The next field provides a choice of voltages that will be presented at the green jacks. Select between Loc, Prs, and Imp (location, pressure, Impact).

A control voltage varying between 0 and 9.99 volts will appear at the violet outputs (the decimal point is not displayed). Cursor into this field to change the programmed voltage. The next field allows a second voltage to be programmed that appears at the blue jacks. Alternatively, the blue jacks may present location – turn the data knob to the extreme left to access location.

**CV OUTS 10-14**

The bottom row of jacks provides access to Location, Pressure, or Impact from individual keys. Each output can respond to a single key with Location, Pressure, or Impact. Use the cursor key to select the data field and the data knob to select the data type (L, P, or I) and the key identifier.

**HEX KEYS R & S**

No programming is needed for the two Hex Keys and they will always respond by default out their respective outputs.

The next page allows the display contrast to be adjusted for optimal viewing. Pick a number between 0 and 7.

The 223e can implement polyphony by stealing radio outputs. Page to:

**Polyphony off**

Use the data entry knob to select from two to four voices. The display will indicate which of the radio outputs have been "stolen" for application to polyphony. These pages will become unavailable for editing, because they will use the parameters from radio output 6. Their outputs will be used to implement polyphony.

**Arpeggiator**

An integral part of an arpegiator is a beat clock. The clock source is selected with the "clock" button. The 223e features three possible clock sources.

1. Ext – In this mode the arpegiator will step with each pulse received in the "pulse" input.
2. Int – In this mode the arpegiator will step based on eighth notes counted by the internal clock. The tempo is set with the "tempo" knob and is continuously variable from 42 to 480 BPM. An applied voltage into the "cv in" input can modulate the clock frequency.
3. MIDI – In this mode both clock LED's are off. The arpeggiator uses the MIDI clock, internally transmitted from the 225e. The tempo knob selects the divide ratio applied to the MIDI clock. The available divisions are:
 a) quarter note e) sixteenth note
 b) quarter note triplet f) sixteenth note triplet
 c) eighth note g) thirty-second note
 d) eighth note triplet h) thirty-second note triplet

 Each range corresponds with a light on the LED ring around the tempo knob. An applied voltage to the CV input can modulate the division.

It is essential to select the keys to be arpeggiated and to determine the control voltage associated with each key. To select the keys available for arpeggiation, first hit the "_page_" key 'till the "_ARPEGGIATION_" LED is illuminated. The following display will appear:

**Arpeggio ky: a
 CV:0 Tr:1 275**

Cursor to the letter a. Now play a key that you'd like arpeggiated. Its letter name will appear. Turn the data knob clockwise, thus capitalizing the name. Play each of the keys to be arpeggiated, turning the data wheel after each entry. Turn it counter-clockwise to remove the selected key from the group.

To expediently create a group of keys to be arpeggiated, cursor to the ky field and turn the data wheel clockwise, thus capitalizing KY. Now simply play each key you'd like in the group. Its LED will illuminate. Another tap on the key will remove it from the group and extinguish its LED.

The second line displays the control voltage originated by a selected key. Cursor to the CV and use the data wheel to select a control voltage from 0 to 9.99 volts. Do this for each key in the group. The second field on this line selects one of four transpositions applied to the entire keyboard called Tr:1, Tr:2, Tr:3, and Tr:4. Tuning is accomplished by turning the data wheel to select a voltage which will be added (or subtracted) to the global arpeggiator output.

Arpeggiation pattern

A second display, accessed with another strike of the "page" button, permits selection of one of five patterns:

**Rising
Fde in:10 out:10**

There are 5 patterns, displayed on the first line as follows:
 Rising, Falling, Triangle, Random, and Spiral.

The first three patterns order the selected notes and then play them, ascending, descending, or both, depending on the pattern. The Random pattern employs a pseudo-random number generator, and the Spiral pattern plays notes in a semi-regular pattern, usually playing each note once, before the first is repeated.

**The "level" banana output**

The second line of the display shows the in and out fade times. Time choices are in seconds and are .5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 for both the in and out fields. The fade voltage is a ramp from 0 to 10 volts applied to the "level" output. Typical use of this would be to be patch this level output to the velocity input of a 292e dynamics manager. Fade in occurs when the run key is engaged (green); fadeout when unengaged (red). _Note that the arpeggiation pattern and the pulses continue until the fade voltage reaches zero, at which time the run LED is extinguished. So a longer fade time means the arpeggiator will continue run for that time even after it is "stopped"._

Auto hold/sustain/latch notes on the arpeggiator:
 To create and hold an arpeggiation pattern, press the **"** _ **add note** _ **"** button – its LED will turn green, and the run LED will turn green. Press keys to add them to the arpeggiation pattern. No need to sustain the keys – simply touch them to accumulate a pattern. To delete keys from the pattern, either press and release the delete key, then touch the single key you wish to delete, or hold the delete key, and simultaneously touch each key to be deleted. To 'lock' a pattern, press the "_add note_" button again; its LED will turn red. This maintains a pattern while freeing keys for other applications. Pressing the "_add note_" button again will return it to the green (unlocked) mode.

Note that the "_R_" and "_S_" keys cannot be enabled for arpeggiation,

Also that the small hex keys at the top left and right of the keyboard were designed to select the next and previous transpose values. Currently, these small hex keys at the top left and right of the keyboard are used instead to remotely work for the switches for "delete note" and "run/stop."

All parameters (including key maps) may be locally stored and subsequently recalled by the model 225e or 206e preset manager.

To connect or disconnect this module from the central library function, push the _"REMOTE ENABLE"_ switch. A lighted LED signifies a connection.
