#### **Description - model 225e MIDI Decoder**

The 225e MIDI decoder translates incoming MIDI messages into analog voltages and pulses. These control signals appear on three kinds of "busses" for subsequent distribution to 200e series modules. Busses A to D are routed internally to 200e series modules that respond directly to MIDI messages. Four more handle only note messages, decoding them into front panel voltages that represent pitches, velocities and pulses with sustain information. An additional six busses handle controller and clock messages (two controllers each), which are translated into standard 0-10 volt control voltages.

_Connections:_ _Use the provided MIDI I/O panel and 10pin cable to mount and connect MIDI In. (MIDI Out is not implemented.) See APPENDIX A at the end of this manual for descriptions of alternate ways to connect MIDI In to your 225e._

**Busses: Note and Controller message assignments to Pulses and CVs.**

Note messages are applied to busses A,B,C,D,E,F,G, and H;

Continuous Controller and Clock messages are handled by busses J, K, L, M, N, and P.

Each bus responds to one selected MIDI channel. But more than one bus may be assigned to the same channel, allowing multiple controllers CVs and note messages to be derived from a single MIDI channel. First select a bus for assignment use "bus select" to illuminate the LED next to the desired bus.

**MIDI NoteOn and pitch translation: Busses A-H**

There are two sets of Note messages busses: A-D and E-H. Internal busses will be explained in more detail later. For these busses the following display will appear:

| **Bus:A Ch:15 Poly**  **Tr:24 Ft:75 Vl:/** |


With the cursor buttons, select a data type. Use the knob to the right of the cursor buttons to enter data for the following fields:

**Ch:**  **MIDI Channel.** The first is the channel number; Incoming MIDI messages on the selected MIDI channel 1-16 will be transmitted on this bus. Channel number 0 leaves the bus inactive.

**Poly/Mono: (note on)** If Mono is selected in this field, then new note messages will cut off the previous notes and new pulses or notes will be generated out the assigned bus. This is the default and best if you have a limited number of oscillators or want to assign each oscillator to a specific MIDI channel. But if you enable polyphony, the bus operates polyphonically between A-D or E-H as notes overlap. In Poly mode, up to four note messages (note on, pitch, and velocity) are distributed between A-D or E-H busses but ONLY IF they are addressed to the same MIDI channel number.

**Tr:** **(or Xpose:) Transpose (pitch).** This field causes incoming MIDI note-on messages to be transposed in semitones (chromatically) by as much as + or – 2 octaves. (-24 to +24).

**Ft:** **Fine Tuning (pitch).** is for fine tuning. This field is applicable to only internal busses A-D. The number 0 translates to the standard A = 440 Hz. "An" means the fine tuning will be done with the fine tuning knob on the oscillator itself. Numbers 1-99 translate upwards in cents. (FYI 100 cents equals one semitone)

**Vl:**  **Velocity**. MIDI note messages include velocity information. Normally, this information is sent unaltered, but if desired, non-linear transformations can be applied to velocity. Velocity curves are displayed graphically, with the normal linear response displayed as /, and other responses displayed as slanted or bent lines. Reversed velocity responses are particularly useful for implementing voltage controlled cross-fading.

That covers the display fields. Now to clarify what an internal bus is.

**Busses A-D: Internal Busses**

The A, B, C, and D busses are dedicated internal busses. All modules within a system share internal communication and some of these modules will respond to note, controller, and clock messages that are appropriate to their function. These modules are the 259e, 261e, 281e, 281h, 292e, 292h 223e, 250e, 251e and 252e. Additionally, the 226h can also send note messages on these busses.

**Patching vs internal bus:**

Using patch cables on the 225e it is typical to patch noteon pulses using busses E-H (out the red banana jack) to the pulse input of a 281e, pitch CV (out the blue banana jack) to an oscillator, and velocity CV (out the green banana jack) to the velocity input on the 292e.

But you can save your patch cables if you use the internal bus. The internal bus sends noteons to the 281h, velocity to a 292e and accurate pitch information to oscillators such as the 259e or 261e. See below for how to do this.

**Assigning the internal bus.**

Up to four 259e or 261e Complex Oscillators can be assigned to the four internal MIDI busses A – D. Plus each of the four sections of one 292e Quad Dynamics Manager and one 281e Quad Function Generator can be assigned these A - D busses if their module ID is set to A.

The MIDI messages recognized and potentially routed to appropriate modules on the internal bus include:

1. Note On and off messages to 281e/h (if Module ID A)
2. Velocity information to the 292e/h (if Module ID A)
3. Pitch/Note number information to all 259e's and 261e's according to their module ID. This includes PitchBend Messages.
4. MIDI Clock Messages, sent to the 223e, 250e's, 251e, and 252e's

_To repeat: the "module ID" used to distinguish multiple modules The oscillators must be assigned to the same bus name (A-D) as the Module ID. The 292e/h and 281e/h must be assigned to Module ID A. (Unlike the oscillators, the 292e and 281e the Module ID is not the same as the Bus name; but instead bus A-D corresponds to the top to bottom on one module.)_ _To read more about module ID's and how to read them and change them, read "the module ID" section in the preset manager description below._

**Controllers: Busses J-P**

To select a bus for MIDI Continuous controller information or pitchbend or aftertouch select a buss from the range J - P, the following appears:

| **Bus:J Channel:15**** Cntrllrs:PW:125** |


Busses J has two outputs (a) and (b) corresponding to the two numbers after Cntrllrs: Select between PW (for "PitchWheel"/pitchbend), AFT (for Aftertouch) or Continuous Controller (CC) numbers 0-125.

_(Note: Typical preassigned CC numbers found on most keyboard controllers include 1 for Modulation/modwheel, 7 for volume, and 64 for sustain switches)_

When using PW keep in mind that pitchbend on channels assigned to busses A - D may be already routed to oscillator modules internally. (See description of internal busses.)

**Clock:**
 If Channel is set to "Clock" (after 16 and before 0) a different interface is displayed:

| **Bus:J Chan:Clock**** Div: 1/4 : 3/8** |


The Div fields allow the 225e to generate 10 volt pulses based on rhythmic divisions of an incoming MIDI clock. The numerator represents a count; valid values are 1-8. The denominator represents a note length. Valid values are:

 1: Whole note 8: Eighth note
 2: Half note 12: Eighth note triplet
 3: Half note triplet 16: Sixteenth note
 4: Quarter note 24: Sixteenth note triplet
 6: Quarter note triplet 32: Thirty-second note

 A pulse is issued after every count of note lengths. In the example above, 1/4 means "every quarter note" and 3/8 means "every third eighth note".

Additional switches:

**MIDI Reset button** : To restore all voltages and internal parameters to their nominal values, hit "MIDI reset". This also sends "all notes off" and "all controllers off" messages to all channels.

**Remote Enable:** To enable storage and retrieval of your settings as part of a preset, engage "remote enable".

The MIDI interface's settings may be locally stored and subsequently recalled by the accompanying preset manager.

To connect or disconnect this module from the central library function, push the remote switch. The lighted red LED signifies a connection

## 225e Preset Manager

_For operation of the Preset Manager on the 225e, please refer_ _back_ _to the_ _**Preset Manager (225e or 206e):**_ _description at the beginning of this manual page 7._
