# **Model 227e System Interface**

This module performs various signal manipulations, prior to sending them to an external sound system.

There are a total of 8 line level signal inputs. Four are primary inputs, and can be individually located in 2 dimensional space under voltage control. The remaining four appear as a separate four channel mixer with a single output; the inputs may optionally be routed to the four outputs. Indicators are provided to display activity and to aid in accurate bus assignment.

First a description of the pots with the grey knobs. _Note that the settings of the grey knobs are not stored as part of a preset__._

**MASTER Equalization and Levels**. EQ can be applied to front (A-B) and rear (C-D) channels; a spectral tilt function is introduced that can compensate for the high treble energy frequently characterizing electronic sounds.

Master level pots for front (A-B) and rear (C-D) channels control your main output levels. Monitoring facilities include VU meters on each channel. 1/4 " phone connections on the back of the system parallel the front – mounted 1/8" jacks. The top 2 ¼" jacks are A&B.

## **Headphones**
 A switch toggles between the front, rear, or all channels. LED's indicate current status. This setting is not stored.

## **Mike preamp**
The 227e contains a microphone preamp with envelope detector and level indication. Gain is set in 15db increments with the adjacent switch. The gain is not stored as part of a preset. The microphone connector is an XLR mounted on panel with the ¼" outputs, usually on the back of the system. (This preamplifier does not provide phantom power.)

## **Submixer**

A switch toggles the submixer "in the mix" and out of the mix. An LED indicates the status. "In the mix" allows the user to mix it's A input to the A output with no additional patching, but it excludes the B, C, and D outputs. Likewise the B input will mix with the B output. This is true for each channel. These grey submixer pot settings are not stored, but the "in the mix" setting IS stored.

The output jack is always active. To have more output control of the entire submix, don't use "in the mix," but instead connect it's submixed output to one of the four main signal inputs.

## **Four signal inputs**

The four signal inputs pots are the blue knobs. Like all blue knobs, their settings can be stored with a preset.

## **Spatial dynamics**
Each signal input has it's own quadraphonic spatial control that can be set with pot settings or controlled by CV inputs. The effects of these controls on the A B C D outputs directly related to the four spatial LEDs.

Standard mode:

In standard mode, the pot and the CV controls are exclusive.

Pan/Rate inputs: The pot labeled "rate" acts as a pan knob, panning between the A and B, or the C and D outputs between. Full pot excursion for pan is between "9 o'clock" and "3 o'clock". But, as indicated by the line to the banana jack, **when the knob is turned fully clockwise, this pot control is switched over to the CV input**.

Front-Rear/Amplitude inputs: The pot labeled "ampl" controls amount of signal between the front (A-B) or the rear (C-D). But, as indicated by the line to the banana jack, when the knob is turned fully clockwise, this pot control is also switched over to the CV input.

(Note that if using only A-B or only C-D outputs, this control becomes control of the "amplitude" of the output signal.)

## **Swirl mode (Automated spatialization)**

Toggle the swirl switch and the associated green LED will indicate the Swirl mode. **In swirl mode, the pot and CV controls work together.**

**The pot and CV input labeled "rate" controls the rate AND direction** of the quadraphonic "swirl" up to 10 Hz. You can mix in CV control. With the pot fully clockwise, the CV has most control over the rate and direction, but moving the pot counter-clockwise mixes in the pot setting. If the pot is fully counter-clockwise, the CV input has no control.

The pot labeled "ampl" determines the extent of the effect, with 0 resulting in a static, centered sound, and 10 resulting in a sound traveling around the periphery of the listening space. The CV input ADDs to the pot setting. So contrary to the pot settings for rate in swirl mode, for the most CV control, turn the pot counter-clockwise. If the pot is fully clockwise, the CV input has no control in swirl mode.

## **Remote Enable**

To connect or disconnect this module from the central library function, push the remote switch. The lighted LED signifies a connection..

The 227e's settings may be locally stored and subsequently recalled by the model 206e or the 225e preset manager.
