**Model 230e Triple Envelope Tracker**

This module is in two sections. The top section tracks the dynamics of applied signals, and the bottom section amplifies small signals from an external instrument or microphone. The two sections are normally connected internally ("normalled"), but if desired, they can be used independently.

First we'll describe the workings of the mike preamp, of which there are three. The input connectors accept either Canon XLR's or standard ¼ inch phone plugs. Three gain ranges are provided, indicated by LED's, and selected by quick presses of the "gain sets". The highest (40db) range is usually required for microphones, while instruments will usually thrive with lower gain settings.

**Phantom power** is available for microphones that require it – switch it on or off by pressing any gain switch and hold for about a second. Phantom power indicated by the green LED is applied simultaneously to all XLR inputs, but never to the ¼" inputs on these jacks.

Individual microphone outputs are provided, as well as a mixed output. An expansion input allows one to use additional modules to expand the inputs.

**Envelope Follower:** Now for the envelope tracker. The three envelope trackers are normally connected to the three mic preamps. These internal "normalled" connections are indicated by circled "N"'s on the panel. If desired to use an envelope tracker independently, simply patch the its input jack to whatever source you'd like and "normalled" connection will disconnect.

With a signal applied, adjust the "sens" to turn on the orange LED's; if the gain is such that a c.v. output exceeds 10 volts, a red "overload" light will warn you.

The decay times of the envelope trackers are variable from .1 to 10 seconds.

**Pulse outputs:** Pulse outputs have two levels in the 200e system. The sustain level is 5 volts, and transients are short 10 volt pulses. Sustained pulses are outputted when the envelope exceeds 5 volts, causing the "action" LED to glow dimly.

The condition for a transient pulse is determined by the state of the "trans" LED. If it is off, transients are generated whenever the sustain threshold is exceeded. If switched on, transient pulses are generated only when a significant c.v. increase occurs, independently of the level. Such pulses cause the "action" LED to flash brightly. Transient signals can thus generate pulses in the presence of background sounds, a particularly useful feature when extracting rhythmic information, as from a drum.

**Remote Enable:** To connect or disconnect this module from the central library function, push the remote switch. The lighted LED signifies a connection.
